Good morning.
It's Friday morning.
Have a good time at the party last night?
Great.
OK, we have a rather full
schedule for you today,
so I'm not going to take any time.
One thing I will remind you is that we
have a feedback forum this afternoon.
I'll also tell you that
at the end of the session,
so we'd like as many of you as
possible to show up for that.
And without further ado,
let me introduce Dave Payne,
the manager of our
developer applications team.
[Transcript missing]
So what we're going to take a look
at today is mostly concentrating on
debugging with Project Builder for
both C-based languages and for Java.
We'll also be getting into some
advanced debugging situations with GDB.
But before we really dive down into that,
we'll also take a look at how to
look at applications that just crash
on your system or if they're hung,
what can you do about that.
So let's just dive right in with that.
So on Mac OS 7, 8, 9, previously,
you're familiar with if
an application crashes,
you can have MaxBug installed on
your screen or on your system,
and you'll crash and catch
the crashes in MaxBug.
We do now have a facility in
Mac OS X to catch crashes and give you
stackback traces and things like that.
In order to enable this,
you have to go in as an admin user.
And add a configuration line
to the etc.host config file.
So the facility is called crash reporter.
And if you go in and set crash
reporter equals dash yes dash,
which is the format that
all those lines are in,
then you'll automatically
get this facility turned on.
So what happens then,
if you're running the
console application,
it'll ask you, hey,
an application just crashed,
do you want to see the stackback trace?
And you'll see the crash log, yes or no.
There's a little dialogue
that pops up there.
And if you say yes,
then it brings console to the foreground.
You've got the console window,
but now you've also got a crash
log window as well that shows
you the stackback trace for all
the threads in your application.
And it shows you the register state.
If you want to look at this sometime
from terminal outside of the application,
you can do that.
So this is a little bit of
the console application.
The file is actually kept in
slash var slash vm crash dot log.
So one thing to be aware of, though,
is it just appends the crash
information to the bottom of this file.
And it retains that across reboots.
So you can have a week's worth of
crashes stored in your file there.
And you fire it up.
And, huh, I thought we fixed that one.
Well, that's because you're looking
at the start of the file.
So you may need to clean
it out on occasion.
But that can be a reason.
It's a really useful facility.
You can then have people, you know,
if you've got beta testers or whatever,
they can enable this on their systems
and send the back traces back to you.
Actually, if I could have a quick
poll of the audience.
I'm considering just automatically
enabling this when we install
the developer tool CD.
What do you think of that?
Okay, we'll try and do that for
next time around then.
That's not happening
this time on your CD,
but you can do this yourself.
So another one is, gee,
my app is just hanging.
What's up with that?
How can I take a look at that?
I've been running it.
Is there anything I can see?
Well, in some of the sessions,
you've seen the sampler graphical
application for doing CPU monitoring,
profiling, what's going on.
There's also a command line
version of that called sample.
From the command line, in a terminal,
you could execute sample
and then the process ID.
And it also understands just
the name of your binary as well,
if there's only one copy of it running.
And then just the number of
seconds that you want to sample.
So I typically say sample
my app for 10 seconds.
It tells you where it puts
the file into slash temp.
And then you can go
off and take a look at,
again, the stack backtraces to see where
your app is spending its time.
Again, that can be a very useful thing
that you could have people
send the samples back to you.
If you do perchance ever happen to
find any bugs in any of our stuff,
it's helpful to attach these crash
logs or these sample outputs into any
bug reports or emails that you would
send in to us to tell us what you
might have found with our code as well.
There's also a facility with GDB.
Where you can attach to a process.
And if you've got source code for it,
then even though you didn't
start it up under the debugger,
you can attach to it later.
We don't have that wired in through
project builder at this point.
But you can do this.
You'll see usages of GDB attached
later in the session.
So many of you are familiar
with some of the debugging
facilities of Project Builder.
It's full graphical debugging
for C-based languages,
so C, Objective-C, C++.
And Zem inspires me to say Objective-C++
will be supported there too.
And also Java.
We support all the different
types of macro binaries that
you've got on your system.
And we'll see how to do that
through the course of this session.
For the C-based languages,
we'd use GDB as the low-level
debugger to communicate with the OS.
Architecturally,
this is what it looks like here.
As Project Builder communicates with GDB,
GDB handles all the complexity of
working with the operating system,
so the Unix P-trace and Mach exceptions
and your target application.
It's a fairly complex interaction.
So it takes care of all that for us.
Because that is fairly complex,
we also work with the MetroWorks
folks to get the CodeWarrior debugging
working well as well by handling
the same level of interaction and
then using a debugging protocol.
If you're using CodeWarrior at all,
you may have heard that they no longer
require the use of the debug knob.
That aspect of it is built
directly into CodeWarrior now.
But at the lower levels,
we share the same facilities.
So without further ado,
I'd like to bring out Rab Hagy,
senior engineer on the
Project Builder team,
to actually show you
Project Builder debugging in action.
Thanks, Rab.
Thanks, Dave.
All right, good morning everyone.
In this section of our
presentation today,
I'll be giving you a bit of a
status on where we stand with
debugging with Project Builder,
talk about how to configure
your project for debugging,
how, where,
and what of setting up your project.
Talk a bit about breakpoints,
and then my colleague Dave will come
up and talk about debugging Java.
All right.
If you're new to Mac OS X and
to Project Builder,
welcome.
I hope you've seen through our
other sessions at the conference
that we have a full-featured IDE,
and with respect to debugging,
we have a nice GUI for
showing the threads,
stacks, and variables in stack frames.
And we have a full-featured
breakpoint model and support
for debugging multiple projects.
If you've been with us for a while,
the changes from last year's conference,
you won't see too many changes
at the user interface level.
We've been concentrating on
improving the infrastructure,
so we have much better C++ support.
We've been tracking changes to Mac OS X,
and we've improved the way
Project Builder communicates
with the underlying debugger.
And of course, last year we showed just a
[Transcript missing]
All right, let's talk about the how
of building for debugging.
With this release of Project Builder,
we've introduced build styles,
which were covered in detail in the
Project Builder in-depth session.
Build styles allow you to configure
a single target for multiple uses.
Out of the box, you get two build styles,
one called development
and one for deployment.
We encourage you to set up
your development build style
tailored towards debugging and
your day-to-day development.
Use the deployment build style for
when you're getting ready to actually
build your product for shipping.
Now, the... The two key aspects of the
build style and building for related
to debugging are the compiler
settings for optimization and
generation of debugging symbols.
So, naturally,
to do full source level debugging,
you need to ensure that you, in fact,
have...are telling the
compiler to generate symbols.
And you can also vary
the optimization level.
Now, just because you can mix generation
of symbols and optimization,
you need to be aware that at the
higher levels of optimization,
the mapping that the symbol information
provides a mapping from the machine state
to the logical state in your source code.
And that mapping begins to break down
at higher levels of optimization.
So we recommend for debugging either no
optimization or optimization level one.
And I'll give you-- in our demo,
I'll cover that a bit more.
All right,
here's a quick look at the user
interface for the target build settings,
just so you can get oriented.
I've highlighted the pop-up for
the development optimization
level and down below the checkbox
for including debugger symbols.
All right, now let's talk about the where
of building your project.
Out of the box, by default,
Project Builder builds each
project in its own build folder,
which contains the intermediate
results of the build and the
final product of the build.
So here we have app project that
builds in its own build folder
and a framework project that
builds in its own build folder.
Now, most projects that you'll be working
with are larger ones and you'll probably
have multiple Project Builder projects.
In that case,
when you have a set of related
projects that you want to
build and debug together,
the default is not suitable.
So what we recommend is that
you create what we call a common
build folder on your system.
And then you need to configure each
project to build in that folder.
And this is a per user setting,
so each user on the development
team needs to configure his or
her instance of the project to
point to a common build folder.
It's a little tricky to
find where the setting is.
You select the top level item
in the groups and file view,
which represents the project.
And then you need to
configure the instance.
And then use the project show info menu.
All right,
so now we've talked about how to build,
where to build.
Let's talk about what gets built.
[Transcript missing]
Executables hold the persistent
state that you set of the program,
kind of the environment of the program.
Because commonly when you're debugging,
you want to run it multiple times,
and it's convenient to set up command
line arguments and environment variables
that can control how your programs run.
Another aspect of executables
is you can set at runtime which
variant of the Apple standard system
libraries or system frameworks,
which variant is used.
The standard variant,
which all apps that are
launched from Finder use,
has minimal symbol information,
a high level of optimization.
The debugger is a very
simple application.
The debug variant can do
additional error checking.
It can do consistency checking
within the library to try to tell
you of problems before they arise.
And, for example,
core foundation provides a lot
of verbose output and error
checking that might be useful.
And finally,
there's a profile variant for use
with the Gprof profiling system.
Here's a screenshot just to get you
oriented on the executable setting.
You can see on the left we've
selected a target and then
gone to the executables tab.
There's the add button for
adding an external executable
and I've highlighted the run tab,
run time tab to show you how
to change the library variant.
Okay,
now just a quick note about breakpoints.
We have two kinds of
breakpoints in Project Builder.
File-oriented breakpoints that
you set when you're editing
or looking at source code,
you can click to the left of the
source code and set a breakpoint
at a particular line in the file.
And symbolic breakpoints,
where you enter the name of a function
that you want the debugger to stop at
when that function is first executed.
And this is a good way of working,
stopping in functions for which
you don't have the source code.
All right, now I'm going to give you
a quick demo of debugging.
Let's see.
I'm going to demonstrate
debugging a plugin.
This is a palette that goes
into Interface Builder.
That's what Interface
Builder calls its plugins.
This palette is an example in
the Developer Examples Interface
Builder Progress View palette.
It's a UI control for
representing a progress view.
Just a little demonstration of
how to write a palette for IB.
Let's do a quick tour of Project Builder
as to what's related to debugging.
Up here we have the debug tab.
Contains the output of the
previous run so you can
Refer to it later.
This is a pop-up for the list of threads.
We're not running anything.
Stack frames and variables.
Here are the control buttons that get
enabled when we're actually running.
And we have a
A breakpoint summary tab to show you
all the breakpoints in your project.
And let's add--
A new symbolic breakpoint.
So you click there and you need
to enter the name of the function.
For Objective-C programmers,
it's sometimes handy to break
on NSExceptionRays so you
know if an exception gets
raised inside your program.
And let's see, go back.
All right.
Let me show you one thing.
We have done a few changes
in the user interface.
We've added a second little tab up
here for the output of the running
program's standard input and output.
And that appears up here.
If you're working at the command line
tool level and you want to type something
at your program while you're running,
you would bring this
down and type in there.
And we've added a few preferences
to let you set the fonts and
font color for everything.
And due to popular demand,
you can set the color of the
highlighting of the current line.
So I'll change that to a nice
shade of blue or something.
And before we start running this program,
let's look at its target,
which builds-- this is a plug-in.
One of the problems you'll have
working with plugins is you
build them in Project Builder,
and now the program you want to run
looks for plugins in specific locations.
How do you get your
plugin into that location?
Well, there are two approaches.
A kind of Unix low-level kind of hacky
approach that works very well is you
go to the directory or the folder where
the plugin or where the containing
application expects to find your plugin,
and you use a symbolic link
to point back to your build
directory and your built plugin.
Another approach is to use... I've
just... I've taken a standard set
of build phases that builds our
plugin and added a shell script
build phase that copies our built
plugin into the directory where,
in this case,
Interface Builder will be looking for it.
How do you get your
plugin into the directory?
On the build settings for the compiler,
we've set optimization level one.
We'll see what that does.
And right now,
you'll notice that the run and
debug icons are not highlighted.
That's because we don't
have an executable.
So I'm going to add in--
crawl around and add in
Developer Applications Interface Builder.
And now our icons are highlighted.
I'm going to add an environment variable.
It's called doLogin.
And this is a good way to take your code.
When you're doing development,
you want it to be a little more verbose,
tell you what's going on.
So I've put in an environment
variable that will cause this
example to do a little logging,
generate some status information.
So let's see, we've got a break point,
so let's start up the debugger.
and give Interface Builder
a minute to start up.
It's got to find all its
plugins on the system.
It comes up,
we'll create just an empty window.
Drag in our little progress view control.
And now when I click on this
inner region where the actual
progress indicator will be drawn,
see over here this inspector has
come up tailored towards that.
This means that this is
our plug-in running now,
putting up its own custom inspector.
So if I type in some code
to change the increment,
we hit a breakpoint.
Now we're in our code executing
in the context of this plug-in,
or in the context of another application.
Let's see.
As we step along,
you can see that in this case
we assigned a value to F.
And as variables change their values,
they show up in red.
We'll step over this.
You can see we're asking the environment,
do we have this environment variable?
Yes, we do,
because we're doing development.
We'll step along that.
And we can see that MSG,
our message we're going to print out,
has been assigned.
The folks at O'Reilly say they've
sold out of all the Cocoa,
learning Cocoa books.
So if you're new to Cocoa with
respect to debugging,
you need to know that many
Cocoa objects are opaque.
If you inspect them in the view here,
you maybe see just--
That fact that it has an is a pointer,
that's a pointer to a class,
but that's all you can see.
So how do you determine
what your Cocoa object is?
Well, we can use the power of GDB to
send a message to this object,
ask it to generate a string
description of what it is,
and then convert that description to
something that can be displayed in GDB.
So we use the print object command,
or PO, the name of the object,
and that's actually invoking
code in the inferior,
running that code,
and returning that into GDB,
into our console here.
And fortunately we have the
string we've just set up here,
current increment is five.
All right.
So we step along, we call NSLog,
the output of the log,
which is going to do the, in this case,
NSLog, and then we call NSLog.
So we have the interface builder,
standard out, or standard error,
shows up in our log.
We've set it up to have a different font.
are different color that can be useful.
Let's step along.
And now I just want to show you a few
things about debugging optimized code.
here.
You can see that we've just assigned a
value to an inter -- a variable called f
at an interscope -- a nested scope level.
We have -- we can show variables with
the same name at different scope levels.
And you can also notice that this obj,
which was a parameter into this function,
changed too.
Well that's because the optimizer
was reusing that register.
If you look carefully at the code,
you can see we declare both an
F and an I at the outermost scope.
But when we look in the variable view,
we see there's only one I,
and that would correspond
to this if block.
And that's because the outermost scope,
the I at the outermost scope
has been optimized out.
So,
Let's see.
I think, yeah, we've got a full day,
so I'm going to stop here.
I hope you've got a quick introduction
to Project Builder and debugging with it,
working with optimized code and plugins.
And now--
Let's see if I point it right.
I'd like to bring up Dave Ewing
to talk about Java debugging.
Thanks, Rab.
All right.
Okay, well, you actually just saw most of
the debugging features in the
Java debugger and Project Builder
2 because they are the same.
The user interface is the same.
It's shared between the two.
So I'm going to go through
just some differences,
some things you have to do differently
when you're debugging in Java.
So the first thing, well,
the three things I'm going to show
in my slides before I do a little
demo are setting up a project to
debug in Java and what you need
to do that's special about that.
What you need to do to set
up the application and its
command line arguments,
and a little bit about Java exceptions.
Java has a very nice exception
model where there's a class,
Java lang throwable,
and every exception that you can
throw has to be a subclass of that.
So it actually is a very nice
Very nice way to program.
So setting up your project for debugging.
The one thing you really want to do
For Java debugging,
is turn on the indexer.
In future versions,
we'll have that turned on by default.
But besides giving browser information--
we have a class browser coming in the
next version-- right now you can command
double click to go between symbols,
and you get function pop-ups
and things like that.
So besides getting that
when you turn on indexing,
you actually get build dependency
support for Java builds.
And you also get a few enhancements
to the debugger support.
So one thing you may not know about
class files and what's produced
when you compile a Java source file
is that there's a source file name
in there in the debugger tables
that you need for the debugger.
But there's not a full path.
You don't know exactly what source
file that might be on the disk.
And Project Builder can try real hard to
figure out which source file you mean,
but if you have two files
with the same base file name,
it can't be sure.
If you have indexing on, we can be sure.
And the other thing you get
if indexing is on and you have
breakpoints set is your debugging
speed will be vastly improved.
It's about 20 to 30% faster
on a small project and it only
gets better for larger projects.
Okay, Java executables.
You can create a standard
Mac OS X application.
If you do that,
one of the files in your project
is an mrjapp.properties file.
And inside that file,
there's a main class setting.
And that is the, it's really the name of
the class that gets run.
So you, you know,
when you create a new project,
there's a default name there,
but you actually may be adding sources
and want to change what that is.
There's also the class path,
which jar files get loaded.
Command line arguments actually
go into that file as well.
For Java tools,
tools that are meant to be
run from the command line,
you basically give it standard
command line arguments that you
would give to the Java executable
in Java being user bin Java.
If you actually have a
manifest file in your project,
which contains a main class entry,
then you would give -jar and then the
name of the jar file on the command line.
And if you don't have a manifest file,
then you would just give the class
path for your jar file and the name
of the main class on the command line.
OK, so our debugger does a few things
to handle Java exceptions nicely.
It's not all the way there.
We have some UI that we want
to wrap around some of this.
But by default, we stop when there's an
exception thrown that is not
caught in your code somewhere.
Now that's really cool.
But it turns out that sometimes
there's code out there that
catches these exceptions that
the debugger can't detect.
If there's Java native code,
meaning like code written in C,
they can actually catch exceptions,
and the debugger has no way to
determine that ahead of time.
So you actually might stop in a few
places that are a bit of a surprise.
So this last point here,
there's a console just
like a GDB console.
In our debugger inside Project Builder.
And there's a few commands
that help you take care of
exceptions when you're debugging.
And with that, let's show a few features
that are specific to Java.
Oh, what a nice screensaver we have.
OK, so when I was trying to
come up with a demo here,
I actually had this
really teeny little demo.
And I was thinking,
that's kind of boring.
I need to do something flashy.
So I went out and was looking
for a quick time for Java demo.
And I couldn't really find anything.
All of them have little teeny
pictures and kind of boring.
So instead of doing something flashy,
I'm going to do something geeky.
So here I have a little project that
uses the Antler parser generator
to parse Java source files.
And I don't really want to get
too much into how a parser works.
I mean, this is a debugging session,
not a parser session.
But it's a cool little program.
We have a main class here that basically
just takes some command line arguments.
At the bottom,
there's a routine called-- oh.
Some of these are somewhere near
the bottom called parse file that
creates a lexer which tokenizes the
source file and creates a parser
which then actually does the parsing.
And then we have this other
routine do tree action which
actually creates a swing tree view
to look at what the parser parsed.
So let's take a quick look at
the target for this project.
You can see it compiles a
bunch of Java source files,
no big deal.
In the executable setting,
it runs the Java command line tool.
And the arguments,
it passes the class path pointing to the
jar file that's built by this project.
And -show tree is what causes
this particular program
to build the swing tree.
And then I actually have two
more arguments over there.
That are source files to parse.
It's actually parsing the
main class file for this demo.
So let's just run that so
you can see what it's doing.
Comes up reasonably quickly.
At the top level,
this is basically the root of the file.
There's nine import statements here.
There's a class declaration,
Java parser demo.
Inside that,
there's a variable and four methods.
OK, now I've set a breakpoint.
Let's just go ahead and debug.
And we hit the breakpoint here.
Now it turns out one of the
cool things about this parser,
the handler parser,
is that when it's looking ahead and
it sees something that's confused,
it actually throws exceptions back to a,
and those exceptions are caught in a
method which can handle the errors.
So in order to see where it
might be throwing exceptions,
We want to turn on the
catching of exceptions,
so catch all, and we'll continue.
We stopped pretty quickly.
We actually stopped in
system class loader code.
In this case,
this is a case where it's actually
catching the exceptions in Java code,
and we can continue on and see it's
just going to keep catching exceptions,
catching exceptions.
So let's turn that off for a moment.
Not much of a typer, I'm afraid.
And let's go on.
We should get to the break
point here in a second.
So one of the things it's doing right
now is it's debugging very slowly.
And that's something that's
actually fixed in the Java patch
that should be live today.
It uses the 131 VM while
you're debugging.
So that speeds things up a lot.
I actually wanted to get that on here,
but we were having other problems
configuring these systems.
So I didn't bother to get it there.
OK, so we hit the break point.
And let's turn on the
catching of exceptions now.
So I've run through this twice.
The first time it went
and parsed this file,
there were all those
class load exceptions.
And we didn't want to see that.
So the second time
I hit this break point,
all those classes are loaded.
So we're not going to hit
exceptions for that anymore.
So I can turn on-- just use the up
arrow-- turn on exceptions again.
And just a moment here.
OK, we caught an exception in the
routine antler.poster.match.
If we look up the stack,
we can see we're actually trying to
match an identifier on the input.
The one thing you'll notice about this
is that there's no
source code down below.
The PC's not showing up there,
and that's sort of irritating.
Well,
it turns out I have another project file
that has the Antler source code in it,
so let me open that up.
Just need to open it up,
don't have to do anything with it.
Now if I click on that line,
it goes to the code in the other project.
This is not a feature that's
specific to the Java debugger.
I just wanted to sneak that in because
it's actually one of the cooler
things about our debugging system.
And you know what,
that's actually about all I have here.
All the other standard stuff in the
debugger is pretty much the same.
You can actually set variables in
this version of the debugger for Java.
That's coming in the next
version for the GDB debugger.
But that's it.
And with that,
we can switch back over to the slides.
I actually have the clicker here.
I want to bring up
Jim Ingham and Klee Dienes.
And they're going to talk about the
gory details of debugging with GDB.
Thanks, .
Well,
that's fast fingers Klee over there.
I'm Jim.
So we're going to tell
you something about GDB,
which is the underlying debugger that
both MetroWorks and Project Builder
use to run and control applications
under debugging on Mac OS X.
First of all, a couple of words.
They said something about this
in the MetroWorks session,
too, and it got some applause, so
Our goals for Project Builder are that
if you are a GUI type debugger person,
you're used to MetroWorks,
things like that,
we're not going to make anything
that you need to do as a user of
debugging require the GDB command line.
You'll always be able to get useful
features from the Project Builder
just straightforwardly.
But the other thing is that GDB is
actually a pretty powerful environment
and there are some things which
using GDB you can actually get a
lot of leverage of its capabilities.
So we also want to make it possible
if you're a GDB user that you can live
in the Project Builder environment,
get advantages of locating
sources and stuff like that,
and still be able to use the
nice features in GDB that if
you've come accustomed to them,
you love them or you might learn
to love them at some point.
We're not all the way there yet.
There are some things in the project
that we're going to be able to
do that are going to be useful.
So we're going to be able to do that.
There are some things in the
GDB console window that don't work
the way they do in the terminal,
which is why in our demo we're
actually going to be using terminal,
but we'll get there.
So why would you want to use GDB as
opposed to Project Builder or in
the context of Project Builder?
It's actually a very
good low-level debugger.
It knows everything
about your application.
It's been hacked on by
people for years and years,
both in the embedded environment
and in the Unix environment.
So there are a lot of
features for locating.
Learning about your program,
poking around,
and various things like that.
It's the low-level debugger
that everybody uses,
so the features that are going
to be in Project Builder will
already be in GDB most likely.
So if there's something we haven't
gotten around to yet in Project Builder,
it'll probably be available in GDB.
So just if you need something that
we haven't gotten around to yet.
It's also scriptable,
so if there are sort of actions that you
want to attach to things that happen,
in the course of your debugging,
you can do that within
the GDB command language,
which is a really nice feature.
And finally, it's extensible,
so if you have some special
purpose things that you want to do,
and we'll show an example
of that a little later on,
it's possible to extend the
GDB debugger to do those things for you.
It's an open source debugger,
so the extensions,
you just get the source.
We have a plug-in architecture,
and you can make commands,
but also the source is available to you.
You can look at it,
see everything that's going on,
and so on.
So the first thing is sort of what
kind of things at this stage are there,
which we haven't yet gotten into PB,
which you might want to use GDB for.
We'll give you three examples of that.
One is remote debugging,
which we certainly intend
to get PB able to do,
but it doesn't do yet.
The other is debugging PEPF binaries,
which in all likelihood
won't make it into PB,
but we'll see.
And then the third is kernel debugging,
another thing that we'd like
to do in Project Builder,
but that's going to take more work
because just the setup for kernel
debugging is a little bit grody.
So first of all, remote debugging.
This is where you have the,
you're running the,
controlling the debugger on one machine.
You're actually running the debugger
and the application on another machine.
We don't have the situation like
MetroWorks where they have a little nub.
But in any case,
the point is that you are not typing,
you're not switching the debugger into
the foreground or anything like that
while you're running the application.
So this is good for full screen
applications like games or situations
where you're trying to debug,
kind of mouse tracking
and stuff like that,
where having the debugger come to the
foreground is obviously not going to
help you figure out what's going on.
So the way that you do this
is that you would start the
application on the remote machine,
and you have to do that.
You can't actually start an
application remotely if it connects
to the Windows server because
the Windows server doesn't allow
you to do that from Telnet or SSH.
So you have to go to the machine
that's going to run the application,
start it up,
and then you go to the machine
you're going to be debugging from,
and you Telnet into the machine,
running the application using Telnet,
SSH, whatever your favorite thing is.
And then you use GDB's attach command.
So the way that that
works is you say attach,
and then you can give the PID,
the process ID of your application,
which you can find
through top or whatever.
But actually we've made it a
little more convenient than that.
If you type the application name of
your application and then hit tab,
it'll actually go and
look at the process list,
find your process for you,
and fill it in.
If there's more than one
process of the same name,
it'll offer you the choice of,
and you can figure out
which process it is.
Again, processes are listed sequentially,
so if it was launched,
the latest launch one is
going to have the highest PID,
so you can kind of
figure it out that way.
And as I say,
we have a few more infrastructure
things that we have to do in GDB to
make this available in Project Builder,
but it'll be available in
Project Builder in the future.
So the other thing is
using GDB with CarbonPath.
So, you know, Maco is the preferred
format for Mac OS X.
That's the one that our tools will
support fully and enthusiastically.
But there are some cases where, you know,
if you're debugging a
CarbonPath application,
you might want to get some features
which aren't available in Code Warrior.
For instance, up until Code Warrior 7,
it didn't know about Maco binary.
So if you wanted to set a breakpoint
in a function in Maco binary
that was called on your behalf,
and it wasn't, you know,
exported to path through
one of these vector libs,
then the only way to do that was to
run your application under GDB instead
and set the breakpoint there.
So that's kind of the main use for it.
I haven't actually played
with the new Code Warrior yet,
so I don't know how easy that
is to do in Code Warrior.
Maybe you can do that fine,
and this is irrelevant.
But also it's nice because, you know,
you can connect remotely if that's
important to you and other such things.
So the way that you do that is, first,
as Robert said, if you want to use really
complex applications,
like, say, any of the Apple tools
with CarbonPath binaries,
then you should build with inline
traceback tables in Code Warrior,
because that records information about
the functions such that the debuggers
and all the other performance tools
can find the names of your functions.
And then the next thing is that the
loader itself is not the thing--the
application loader on Mac OS X doesn't
actually load CarbonPath binaries.
It's actually an application,
a Maco application.
Which is responsible for
loading the CarbonPath binary.
So that's this thing called LaunchCFMApp.
That's the thing that
you have to run GDB on.
And I say long path because if
I actually typed it out on the screen,
it would actually fill this whole slide.
But if you look at the little URL,
it's in the URL,
so just cut it and paste it.
And then when you run,
the way that the LaunchCFM application
works is that it takes as its first
argument the name of the CarbonPath
application that you are running.
are actually attempting to run.
So in GDB,
you say run and then you give it the name
of the application that you want to run.
And as I say,
there's much more details about
this in this tips and tricks URL.
So then the other place where you
need to use GDB and Project Builder
doesn't support this yet is
kernel extension debugging.
This is a two machine
debugging situation.
In this case,
GDB runs on the machine that
you're sitting on because of
course you're debugging the kernel
and GDB is a user space program,
so it's really not going to
be able to run on the machine.
The two machines talk to one
another through a protocol
called the KDP protocol.
You don't need to worry
too much about that.
The only thing is kind of conceptually
what's going on is that the kernel
has a little agent that lives in the
kernel and GDB connects to that agent
and talks to it with some protocol
and that's how the GDB sitting on your
desktop machine is able to control
the kernel that you're connecting to.
The only restriction is that
the two machines have to be
on the same subnet to connect.
When you're running the kernel under GDB,
it's just like you're
running any other program.
There's nothing particularly
special going on.
You can do backtraces,
you can control execution.
Everything works just like GDB running
on a normal application and it's
kind of hidden to you that you're
talking across this protocol.
The only thing to keep in mind though
is that you are talking to a little
agent that's living in the kernel,
so if you do something really heinous
to the kernel in the course of your
running your kernel extension or whatever
and that causes the kernel to lock up,
then you could very likely
kill the little agent and then
GDB is just dead because it
has nothing to talk to anymore.
What you'll see is it will start
reporting timeouts talking to
the kernel agent and that means
that you've completely hosed the
machine and you'll have to reset.
Sorry.
And then there's much more information
about this in the tutorial.
Okay, so now we're going to just show
you a few of the neato reasons
why you might want to use GDB,
even if you have a nice,
fancy IDE to control sort of the
more common aspects of debugging,
like inspecting variables and stuff.
So there are a few features
that we'll talk about.
One is the expression evaluator.
We'll talk about how you
can have commands which fire
when breakpoints are hit.
We'll talk about how to set up
conditional breakpoints so that
you can have breakpoints only
hit when certain things happen.
You can take a bunch of actions and
can them up into your own user-defined
commands to extend the GDB language.
And finally, if you're really ambitious,
you can write your own extensions
to GDB and see and load them in.
For all of this, the GDB manual is in
the developer package.
It's in developer documentation,
developer tools,
and it's a pretty nice manual.
It gives you, you know,
tells you about all the GDB commands,
has some nice examples,
things you might like to do.
So if you get interested in this,
that's a good place
to go for information.
So now, Klee is going to,
this is Klee Dinas.
He's my cohort in GDB things.
He's going to show you
some cool GDB stuff.
So the first thing is
the expression evaluator.
Basically, you can call any function
that's in your target from GDB.
And you just use the syntax of
the language that's involved.
So we'll use the appearance sample,
our favorite little demo.
And in this case,
what we're going to do is call the
print functions that are in Carbon,
which help you get access to all
of the opaque stuff that you're
not supposed to look at anymore.
So first of all,
there are a bunch of print functions.
I can never remember the names of things.
And I refuse to remember
the names of things if I can
remember how to find them.
So it's actually info function.
So there's a gdb command info function.
You give it a regular expression.
Don't worry about that.
And just copy this down.
And it'll tell you
everything that's there.
So there's all the lovely debug
print functions you can poke
around and use any of them.
Let's print the window list.
See what's there.
Nothing yet.
So if we step one step, or next-- OK,
now we've created a window.
So if we look at the
window list this time,
hey, there's a window.
And so then we can look up and then, hey,
there's a debug print window.
So let's see about that one.
So we're going to call
debug print window.
The first entry is the
actual window token.
And since it's hex,
we have to tell gdb it's hex.
So there's all your
information about the window.
A couple of other things to
remember is that the functions that
you call do change target state.
None of these debug functions do,
obviously,
unless the guys in the Carbon are
pulling some kind of joke on you.
But in general,
a function will run in your program,
which may be good.
You may actually want
to change target state.
But if you call a function that crashes,
you'll crash your program.
Also, you can call these functions
anywhere you use a gdb expression.
So you can set variables to the value of
a function called and so on and so forth.
So the next thing which is really
useful is breakpoint commands.
We're going to give a silly
little example here where
you might want to use it.
Although for this,
there are other tools like ObjectAlloc
that probably do a better job of it.
But you've got a problem with
retains and releases with CF,
with core foundations.
Somebody is over-releasing something,
and your program is crashing.
And what you'd really like to
do is know all the times that
an object gets retained and all
the times that it gets released,
some of these are not under your
control because they're called on your
behalf by various other CF functions.
So you need some other way to
get when that actually occurs.
So what we're going to do is
we're going to run-- we built
this little string example.
And if you notice,
there's a bug that we've got
to release the str1 twice.
That's down at the bottom.
That's the bug.
So what we want to do is we
want to break on the CF retain,
break on CF release every time it occurs.
And then when that occurs,
we'd like to print out a little
information for ourselves so that we
don't have to go grub around every time.
To do that, you set a command.
So you say commands.
And then if you don't give an argument,
it's the last breakpoint you set is
the one that the commands register for.
You can also give a breakpoint number.
In this case, what we're doing is we're,
again,
calling inferior functions on our behalf.
We're getting the retain count.
The little trick is that the arguments
that are passed to a function
in the PowerPC ABI are stored
sequentially starting in register 3,
register 4, 5, and so on.
So since we know that the
CF retain takes one argument,
which is the thing that you're retaining,
that's got to be in R3.
So we say CF get retain count of $R3.
That's just the argument
that's passed to CF retain.
And then we're going to print some
information about what's going on there.
And we're going to print the backtrace.
So Klee is also-- because he doesn't
want to have to type all this stuff in--
he's using the source command in GDB.
He put this stuff in a file and is
just using the source command to
bring that file of GDB commands in.
So it made a couple breakpoints.
So this is cool.
Now every time he continues,
we hit a CF retain, CF release call.
We print a little information,
and we can step through code this way,
sort of automatically printing out
the stuff that's interesting to us.
But if you were in a big program,
and this was going to
happen hundreds of times,
you probably wouldn't want
to step through each time,
because that would get
really old very quickly.
What you might want to do is sort of do
an on the fly logging facility instead,
to log all the calls
to retain and release.
So you can do that also.
You can just put a continue
command in your breakpoint command,
and that says, hit this breakpoint,
do a little bit of logging,
print out some stuff,
and then keep running.
I have a little log of all
our cf.retains and releases.
This also is a little
bit overkill because,
I mean, you know,
there might be hundreds of these.
This is going to just
totally swamp the screen.
It would be nice if you could
be a little more discriminating
about what you are watching.
So that's the point of
conditional break points.
You can tell GDB to stop only
when certain conditions are true.
The conditions can be basically
any expression which is valid
in the language that you stop at
when you hit that break point.
And the condition gets re-evaluated
every time you hit the break point.
So you can basically write some C code,
whatever you want,
and GDB will evaluate that C code
and then either stop or not based
on whether it's true or false.
So in this case,
what we're going to do is, again,
we have a suspicion that
it's str1 that's the bad guy.
So we want to only watch
retains and releases of str1.
Remember,
since the condition is getting evaluated
every time the break points hit,
str1 is no longer in scope.
So we have to actually store away
str1 so we can use it later on.
And GDB allows you to use
convenience variables.
Any variable that begins with a
dollar sign is actually a variable
that GDB stashes away on your behalf.
So we're storing str1 when we first
create it in this watch variable,
and then we do the regular stuff.
We make our break.
And we actually are also
including the command in the
file he's going to source in.
And then finally,
we set a condition on this break point.
$bpnum is another of these
magical convenience variables.
It's just the number of the
last break point that was set.
So if you want to store away
a break point number for
later use in your commands,
you use the bpnum variable.
And we're going to break when $r3, again,
the argument to the cf retain
is equal to this watch variable
that we've stored away.
So-- So that's cool, nothing printed.
Now we only see the ones for the
token that we were interested in.
And finally, this would get really old to
type after a while and also,
you know, notice that he was able
to call a start watch,
stop watch to actually watch
just one particular thing.
If you were going to do
this over and over again,
it would be nice to can the set of
operations that did the watching and
then just reuse them over and over again.
For that, you can use what are called
user-defined commands in GDB.
The syntax, this is not a particularly
useful example,
this is just to show the syntax,
is you say define and then you give
any name of the command that you want.
If you name it the same
as the GDB command,
you'll override the GDB command which
may or may not be what you want,
probably not.
And then you give any valid GDB commands
and finally the end statement.
So the more complicated one
that we're using is actually
over on the screen there,
the start watching command.
The other thing about
the GDB define commands,
you can actually pass it on to the user.
You can pass arguments to them and they
are stored in convenience variables,
$arg0, $arg1, and so on and so forth.
So we want to say start watching
in the string we're interested
in watching and that gets
stored into this watch variable.
And then we've set the breakpoints
up in advance so they're
just sitting around for us.
Our start watching command just enables
those breakpoints so you can enable
and disable breakpoints in GDB just
like you can in Project Builder.
And finally we set the
conditions on those breakpoints.
And then we, for convenience,
defined a stop watching command.
You can say, okay, I'm not interested in
watching those things anymore.
You just type stop
watching and you're done.
That's convenient.
Yeah, that's this.
So we define these two commands,
start watching and stop watching.
And finally,
you can put all this in a file,
and then there's a GDB source command.
You can just say source
and give a file name,
and all these commands
will be sourced into GDB.
They'll be available to you.
So if you have a bunch of special
purpose tasks that you do in GDB,
you can make a whole directory
full of useful little files and
source them in as you need them,
and you don't actually
have to type stuff.
So the last feature is this allows you
to do things in the GDB command language.
The one thing to be a little bit aware
of is that GDB's command language is
not designed to be a high-performance
interpreter by any means.
So if you're doing something really,
really complicated,
it's probably going to get slow on you.
And at that point,
you might think about whether you wanted
to write an extension to GDB in C,
C++, Objective-C.
I mean,
the nice thing is you get access to
all of GDB's internal functionality.
On the other hand,
GDB has a lot of internal functionality,
not all of which is
terribly well-documented,
so there's a fairly high learning curve.
But if you have a job to do,
you got a job to do.
You know, this might help you.
The other thing to keep in mind
is that GDB is under the GPL.
It's an open-source piece of software.
So if you are thinking about
writing GDB plug-ins which you
want to make commercial things,
then realize that they're going to
have to be distributed under the GPL.
So the GPL license as well.
If you want to just use it for in-house,
it doesn't matter.
The GPL allows you to do whatever
you want for in-house use and
only restricts what you do if
you're trying to sell or distribute
commercially or whatever your software.
They're faster and they
have much more capability,
much more flexible than GDB.
So here's our example.
You know, the guys at--various people at
Apple have MaxBugs wired into
their mental processes and their
fingers just type MaxBugs commands.
And so the people who were using GDB,
a bunch of the guys in our group
just couldn't type the GDB commands.
They needed the MaxBug commands.
They needed MaxBug.
They needed it.
So one of them actually
went to the trouble of--
Making MaxBug.
So it's got the complete
MaxBug command sets.
It updates properly.
It has all the instruction listing and
everything that you've come to love.
It's got a nice little help so you
can figure out what they all are.
Actually been a lifesaver
for some of the people here.
The one thing about it is that it's in
this user lib exec GDB plugins max bug,
and you just source that file in.
In the version that's
on both GM and the CDs,
there was a bug in the
file that you source in.
A path was set to be wrong.
So you just need to go change
that if you want to use this.
And there's a tech note
on the developer website.
Please, typing in the address now.
That tells you what you need to do.
But actually, if you fire it up once,
it'll say, can't find this file.
And you'll look,
and there's bogus stuff in the file,
obviously.
So it's pretty easy to fix.
OK.
And with that, I'll bring Dave back up to
tell us the last little bits
about debugging on Mac OS X.
Okay,
so we've seen quite a lot of different
powerful features here today.
If you've been to WWDCs
the past couple of years,
you've seen me standing up
here saying we're committed to
delivering great developer tools.
It's fun this year to
actually be up here saying,
well, you've got them now.
And you've seen a lot of power here
under the covers that there's a lot
more we can do in terms of extending
what we've got in Project Builder.
What we've got there today is very
powerful for C-based language debugging,
for Java debugging.
But a lot of this capability of GDB,
we just need to provide
more user interface to it,
and we can bring some of this more out
into the Project Builder UI as well.
So there's a lot of additional
improvements that we plan to make
in the product for debugging and
across Project Builder as a whole.
A lot of what we do is guided
by the feedback that we get.
All of my team monitors what's going on
on the projectbuilder-users email list.
That's the best way to
broadly communicate with us.
And the entire rest of the community.
If there's just feedback you
want to send directly to us,
actually I should move
on to the lists here.
There's ways to do that as well.
So let me actually bring
Godfrey back on stage.
I was going to yank his chain this
morning and have him introduced
under the wrong name like we
had done on Tuesday as well.
My new name is Jonathan.
Jonathan DiGiorgi.
Here we are.
Well, thank you very much.
It's very good to see such a large
crowd here on a Friday morning.
Pointing to the
information resources page,
you have the clicker.
I have the clicker.
The first is our master
page for all Mac OS X tools.
We try to put everything up there.
We have a number of additions to make,
both third-party and internal,
and we continually develop it.
We put the latest things on each of
the pages for each specific technology.
Below that,
we have Apple's master mailing list
page and the Project Builder users page.
What do we have now, almost 1,000 users?
I keep waiting.
We were at like 944 last night.
Come on, give me over 1,000 here.
So go sign up.
We're reaching here.
Roadmap.
We have a feedback forum for
all the developer tools this
afternoon at 3:30 in room J1.
Not on the roadmap,
but other important sessions
that are still technically
part of the tools track.
Right after this session in A2,
we have the Darwin Documentation
Project and Head of Doc.
And also at 2 o'clock,
we have the Apple C++ Framework session,
which talks about the
Apple Class Suites and Mac App.
For those people
interested in those areas,
those are going to be very good sessions.
And my contact information,
if you have any questions, any interests,
any needs in tools,
you can always contact
me at ramaran@apple.com.
And we have the
Mac OS X Tools Feedback Mailing List,
which actually distributes an incoming
email to all of the engineering team.
So if you have feature enhancements,
ideas, we love to hear this stuff.
We really want your feedback.
So that's a great address if
you don't necessarily want to
send it to the whole community,
but just the 30 or so of us on that list.
The Interface Builder
folks are on there as well.
And I know everybody to distribute
other requests to on that.
And also, send bug reports in as well.
That's how we actually fully
keep track of everything.